---
published: false
---
## LCH14 - The first nlog(n) FFT for binary fields

We've known for a long time how to do FFTs over smooth multiplicative groups. (Since 1805 per wikipedia) However it was only very recently that the first `O(nlog(n))` FFT for subspaces in binary fields was found. This was detailed in the 2014 paper "Novel Polynomial Basis and Its Application to Reed-Solomon Erasure Codes" by Sian-Jheng Lin, Wei-Ho Chung, and Yunghsiang S. Han ([LCH14](https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3458)). This post is about explaining the FFT algorithm from the paper.

This algorithm isn't of purely academic interest. Binary fields are often used for their very efficient arithmetic on modern computers. Addition within a binary field translates to xor instructions, and multiplication has [special hardware instructions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CLMUL_instruction_set) on most architectures. Reed-Solomon error correction codes use binary fields because they are space constrained, and can't afford to waste potential information with the overhead of serializing a prime field into bits. The encoding and decoding procedure of these error correction codes matters a lot, and it is the FFT. IOP based SNARKs (such as [STARKs](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/046.pdf), [Aurora](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/828)) can typically support both binary fields and prime fields, and the choice comes down to whats faster to prove / verify. The primary bottleneck in prover time for these IOP based SNARKs is the FFT. So speedups in the FFT have speed improvements in error correction codes and SNARK provers.

### What is an FFT

Before going any further, its probably worth recapping what is an FFT. An FFT takes a polynomial of degree `n`, and evaluates it over `n` points within a field. Since evaluating a polynomial takes `O(n)` operations, doing this naively `O(n^2)` operations. Instead an FFT utilizes structure within the points it is being evaluated over, in order to evaluate the polynomial more efficiently. The standard Cooley-Tukey multiplicative FFT is used when evaluating your polynomial over a cyclic group of order `2^k`. The LCH14 FFT works on affine subspaces of binary fields, which by definition will have order `2^k`. In this post, I'll only be explaining the non-affine case for simplicity.

Lets recap the Cooley-Tukey FFT. We want to evaluate a degree `n` polynomial `P` over a cyclic subgroup of order `n` generated by `g`. The idea is that we can split `P` into two polynomials of degree `n/2`, `Even` and `Odd`, where the constant term of `Even` is the constant term of `P`, the linear term of `Even` is the coefficient of `x_2` in `P`, etc. Similarly `Odd`